# GSM-based-security-alarm-system-using-Arduino
Home Security Systems are an important feature of modern residential and office setups. Home security systems must be affordable, reliable and effective.
Modern complex home security systems include several security features like fire, intruders, electronic door lock, heat, smoke, temperature, etc. Some security systems may be a combination of all the security measures.In this project, I have designed a simple but very efficient home security that has a function of calling the homeowner on his/her mobile number in case of an intruder alert.The project is based on Arduino, PIR motion detection sensor and GSM Module.
# Working of the Project
PIR sensor detects motion by sensing the difference in infrared or radiant heat levels emitted by surrounding objects. The output of the PIR sensor goes high when it detects any motion. The range of a typical PIR sensor is around 6 meters or about 30 feet. For proper operation of PIR sensor, it requires a warm up time of 20 to 60 seconds. This is required because, the PIR sensor has a settling time during which it calibrates its sensor according to the environment and stabilizes the infrared detector. During this time, there should be very little to no motion in front of the sensor. If the sensor is not given enough calibrating time, the output of the PIR sensor may not be reliable.
When the PIR sensor detects any motion, the output of the sensor is high. This is detected by the Arduino. Arduino then communicates with the GSM module via serial communication to make a call to the pre programmed mobile number.
An important point to be noted about PIR sensors is that the output will be high when it detects motion. The output of the sensor goes low from time to time, even when there is motion which may mislead the microcontroller into considering that there is no motion.
This issue must be dealt with in the programming of Arduino by ignoring the low output signals that have a shorter duration than a predefined time. This is done by assuming that the motion in front of PIR sensor is present continuously.
